Tsunami hits New Zealand east coast after 7.5-magnitude earthquake
Civil defence says first wave has struck the South Island and warns that more could reach the coast in the hours ahead
A tsunami has struck New Zealand’s east coast after a powerful earthquake hit the country’s South Island just after midnight.

The US Geological Survey said the magnitude-7.5 quake hit 59 miles (95km) from Christchurch just after midnight local time on Sunday.

New Zealand civil defence said the first wave hit the South Island around two hours later and warned it was likely more could reach the coast in the hours ahead.

Officials confirmed there had been some casualties although it is not clear how serious these are as roads to some of the worst affected areas remain impassible so rescuers are flying in by helicopter.

Play VideoPlay
Current Time 0:00
/
Duration Time 0:46
Loaded: 0%
Progress: 0%
FullscreenMute
Facebook Twitter Pinterest
 Damage to room caused by New Zealand earthquake
Concern was growing for people in the coastal town of Kaikoura, which has been cut off by the disaster amid reports of a number of casualties there.

Located near the epicentre, it appears to be one of the hardest hit areas, and officials are hoping to get a better understanding of the damage once the sun rises.

Helicopters are being sent to check the area and assist the victims.

Thousands stranded and towns cut off after New Zealand quakes – as it happened
Latest updates as scale of damage across parts New Zealand’s South and North Islands becomes clear
 Read more
After the earthquake struck warning sirens sounded up and down the coast and officials advised anyone near the shoreline to move to higher ground immediately. The evacuation zone quickly expanded to include the eastern coast of the North Island, including Wellington.

The US Geological Survey said the magnitude-7.5 quake hit 59 miles (95km) from Christchurch, which is still recovering from the 2011 earthquake that killed 185 people and destroyed many buildings.

 Follow
 MCDEM ✔ @NZcivildefence
Waves are expected to arrive at the Chatham islands immediately - anyone in the Chathams should move to high ground urgently #eqnz
9:58 AM - 13 Nov 2016
  847 847 Retweets   382 382 likes
According to the New Zealand Herald, people from as far away as Wellington and Dunedin felt the quake. It said sirens could be heard in Wellington and that “people are on the street crying”.

Civil defence issued a tsunami warning for the entire east coast and said it was “assessing [the] situation with assistance of scientific advisers and civil defence groups”.

View image on Twitter
View image on Twitter
 Follow
 MCDEM ✔ @NZcivildefence
The tsunami threat is for the east coast of all New Zealand (including Christchurch, Wellington and the Chatham islands) #eqnz
9:21 AM - 13 Nov 2016
  3,468 3,468 Retweets   1,402 1,402 likes


In the early hours of the morning the country’s Civil Defence Minister Gerry Brownlee confirmed the first casualties from the earthquake in the town of Kaikoura, on the east coast of New Zealand’s South Island. Although he was unable to give any further details. Some houses, roads and bridges have also been damaged.

There have been scores of aftershocks throughout the night in New Zealand some of them very strong and large parts of the coast including the city of Wellington have been evacuated.

Hurunui District’s deputy mayor, Marie Black, who lives in the earthquake epicentre, told the New Zealand Herald she had been asleep when the first tremor hit.

“We live about halfway between Hanmer Springs and Christchurch and it was a significant shake. I have felt several aftershocks and it is very unnerving.”

There had been reports from local residents that buildings were damaged and water tanks had been shaken loose, she said.


New Zealand lies on the notorious Ring of Fire, the line of frequent quakes and volcanic eruptions that circles virtually the entire Pacific rim.

