Video shows first tsunami waves strike after large earthquake rocks Japan

TSUNAMI waves triggered after a 6.9 magnitude earthquake struck Japan have hit land.

Warnings of waves up to 10ft high were issued at around 21:00 GMT on Monday night with tsunami sirens and alerts being set off.

Thousands were called to evacuate areas across Japan’s eastern coast and minor injuries were reported.

In 2011 an earthquake and subsequent tsunami struck the region killing 18,000 people and set off a meltdown at the Fukushima nuclear power plant.

Waves around 4.5ft were spotted washing ashore around Sendai – which is roughly 45 miles north of Fukushima.

Waves strike Japan after the earthquakeEPA
Japan was rocked by a 6.9 magnitude earthquake on Monday night
A resident of Iwaki, a city close to Fukushima, said: “We saw high waves – but nothing that went over the tidal barriers.”

USGS geophysicist Jessica Turner told CNN the quake was smaller than the disaster struck five years ago.

She told CNN: “It is much smaller in magnitude and energy release than the 9.0-magnitude that occurred in March of 2011… we can expect to see aftershocks for the next several days (but) it’s hard to predict.”

The Japanese Meteorological Agency ordered several locations to “evacuate immediately” and move to higher ground as news of the tsunami broke.

An emergency bulletin stated: "Tsunami Warning. Damage due to tsunami waves is expected.

Cars in a line in JapanGETTY
Thousands were told to flee the region after the tsunami warning in Japan was triggered
The Fukushima nuclear disaster
Fri, March 11, 2016
The Fukushima disaster was one of the world's worst nuclear plant accidents. A 12.5 mile exclusion zone was created in the aftermath of the meltdown. These pictures show how nature has reclaimed the deserted land.

A wave approaches Miyako City from the Heigawa estuary in Iwate Prefecture after the magnitude 8.9 earthquake struck the area March 11, 2011
Survivors react after collecting their belongings at their destroyed house in a village hit by an earthquake and tsunami in Otsuchi, northeast Japan March 17, 2011
Houses are swept by water following a tsunami and earthquake in Natori City in northeastern Japan March 11, 2011
A woman cries while sitting on a road amid the destroyed city of Natori, Miyagi Prefecture in northern Japan March 13, 2011
A building destroyed by the 11 March 2011 tsunami can be seen in Ukedo district of Namie, Fukushima Prefecture, Japan, 24 February 2016
A woman reacts while using a mobile phone as she looks at her house destroyed by the earthquake and tsunami in Kessenuma town, in Miyagi prefecture March 28, 2011
We saw high waves – but nothing that went over the tidal barriers
A resident of Iwaki
"Evacuate immediately from coastal regions and riverside areas to a safer place such as high ground or an evacuation building.

"Tsunami waves are expected to hit repeatedly. Do not leave safe ground until the warning is lifted.

"Get out of the water and leave coastal regions immediately.

"Due to the risk of ongoing strong currents, do not enter the sea or approach coastal regions until the advisory is lifted."

People on a platform watching a river in JapanREUTERS
People keep a lookout on the mouth of a river after the tsunami warning
University of Sydney’s disaster risk management expert Dale Dominey-Howes said: "Residents in the region are still struggling to recover from the 2011 event resulting in compound socio-psychological impacts on survivors.”

Japanese Minister for Disaster Management Jun Matsumoto told reporters there had been no reports of significant injuries. 

One woman suffered cuts to her head from falling dishes, Kyodo reported, citing fire department officials.

Earthquakes are common in Japan, one of the world's most seismically active areas. Japan accounts for about 20 per cent of the world's earthquakes of magnitude six or greater.
