Japan earthquake: small tsunami strikes Fukushima coastline after 7.4 magnitude quake

 Barney Henderson  David Lawler  Julian Ryall, tokyo  Chris Graham, video source storyful/ap 
22 NOVEMBER 2016 • 2:01PM
7.4 magnitude earthquake strikes northern Japan
Tsunami of up to 90 centimeters recorded
1.4 metre tsunami hits Sendai
1 metre tsunami at Fukushima nuclear plant
Residents ordered to evacuate from coastal areas
Depth of the quake recorded at 10 km
A powerful earthquake off the northeast Japanese coast on Tuesday sent residents fleeing to higher ground and prompted worries about the Fukushima nuclear power plant destroyed by a tsunami five year ago.

Lines of cars were seen snaking away from the coast in the pre-dawn hours after authorities issued a tsunami warning and urged residents to seek higher ground immediately. The warning was lifted nearly four hours later.

Firefighters and others watch the port to check the water level as a tsunami warning is issued following an earthquake in Soma
Firefighters and others watch the port to check the water level as a tsunami warning is issued following an earthquake in Soma CREDIT: AP
The magnitude 7.4 earthquake struck in the same region that was devastated by a tsunami in 2011, killing some 18,000 people.
 
Paid content
Recommended by
There were reports of minor injuries and damage, Japanese broadcaster NHK said. The earthquake shook buildings in Tokyo, 150 miles southwest of the epicentre.


NHK also showed one person's video of water rushing up a river or canal, but well within the height of the embankment. It was eerily reminiscent of the 2011 disaster, when much larger tsunamis rushed up rivers and overflowed, wiping away entire neighbourhoods.

On Tuesday, tsunami waves were recorded along the coast. The highest one was 1.4 metres in Sendai Bay. A tsunami advisory was eventually lifted at 12.50pm local time.

The Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant in Okuma, Fukushima Prefecture
The Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant in Okuma, Fukushima Prefecture CREDIT: AP
The operator of the Fukushima Dai-ichi plant said there were no abnormalities observed at the plant, though a swelling of the tide of up to 1 metre was detected offshore.

The plant was swamped by the 2011 tsunami, sending three reactors into meltdown and leaking radiation into the surrounding area. The plant is being decommissioned but the situation remains serious as the utility figures out how to remove still-radioactive fuel rods and debris and what to do with the melted reactor cores.

Plant operator Tepco said a pump that supplies cooling water to a spent fuel pool at the nearby Fukushima Dai-ni plant stopped working, but that a backup pump had been launched to restore cooling water to the pool. 

Vehicles make a line as they flee following a tsunami warning in Iwaki, Fukushima prefecture
Vehicles make a line as they flee following a tsunami warning in Iwaki, Fukushima prefecture CREDIT: AP
Naohiro Masuda, head of TEPCO's decommissioning unit, said he believed the pump was shut off automatically by a safety system as the water in the pool shook.

He said decommissioning work at the destroyed Dai-ichi plant had been temporarily suspended because of the earthquake.

The US Geological Survey measured the magnitude at 6.9.

2:23am
Witness recalls quake
Akemi Anzai, from the city of Minamisoma which lies north of the Fukushima plant, has described to AFP the moment the quake struck.

"It was huge and lasted so long. The tsunami siren warning can be heard from the coastline. The ground is still shaking. I'm so scared. But my concern is rather the situation at the nuclear plant."

Some evacuees took to Twitter to express their fears.

"I'm at a cultural centre where I evacuated during the previous disaster (in 2011)," one person tweeted in Japanese. "This reminds me of that."

1:04am
Warnings lifted
Tsunami warnings have now been lifted. However, there are tsunami advisories still in effect in Iwate, Miyagi, Fukushima, and Ibaraki. 

12:49am
Waves travels down river in Japan
 Footage has emerged of a large tidal wave travelling down a river on Japan's east coast after the quake.


12:21am
Tsunami over a wide area
 Tsunamis of about 30-40cm are still hitting the coastlines, NHK reported.

Higher tides have been reported along the coastline
Higher tides have been reported along the coastline CREDIT: NHK
12:08am
Tsunami reported
These are the tsunami that have been reported along Japan's eastern coastline so far. Officials warn the danger is not yet over and that sea level is still rising.

Reported tsunami
Reported tsunami CREDIT: NHK
12:00am
Nuclear plant back to normal
The operator of the Fukushima Dai-ichi plant has said there were no abnormalities observed at the plant, though a swelling of the tide of up to 1 metre was detected offshore.

Plant operator TEPCO said a pump that supplies cooling water to a spent fuel pool at the nearby Fukushima Dai-ni plant stopped temporarily, but that it was working again. The Tokyo-based utility is investigating the cause.

The No.3 reactor building at Tokyo Electric Power Co. (TEPCO)'s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant 
The No.3 reactor building at Tokyo Electric Power Co. (TEPCO)'s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant  CREDIT: REUTERS
11:38pm
Residents flee
Residents are fleeing from coastal area in Fukushima prefecture and local TV is urging people not to go back - it reminded people that people died in 2011 when they returned after believing the tsunami has stabalised. 

A few waves have hit the coastline - the highest in Sendai - but no major damage has been reported yet. Officials are warning that the waves could rise further, though. 

Vehicles make a line as they flee following a tsunami warning in Iwaki, Fukushima prefecture
Vehicles make a line as they flee following a tsunami warning in Iwaki, Fukushima prefecture CREDIT: AP
11:32pm
Scene of Sendai port
Live TV coverage of Sendai port
Live TV coverage of Sendai port CREDIT: NHK
11:28pm
1.4 metre wave spotted in Sendai
A few moments ago, NHK reported that a 1.4 metre tsunami was spotted in Sendai - the biggest yet. Local TV is stressing that residents must stay away from coastal areas.


Japan's Meteorological Agency has now also revised the magnitude of the earthquake to 7.4 now. 

11:01pm
Fukushima cooling system affected by earthquake 
National broadcaster NHK has reported that cooling to the spent nuclear fuel pool for the No. 3 reactor at the Fukushima Daini nuclear plant has halted, although the operator of the plant said there was no immediate danger.

10:37pm
Tsunami waves hit coast
A two-foot tsunami has arrived at Onahama Port in Fukushima, followed by a 3 foot tsunami at Soma, a coastal city in the Fukushima region hit badly in the 2011 disaster, NHK has reported.

Tsunami waves are also reported to have arrived at the nuclear power plant, although there are no immediate details about height or potential damage, Danielle Demetriou writes. 

Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant is currently being decommissioned, a delicate decades-long operation. It still currently requires critical cooling systems to operate to keep spent fuel cool. The only casualty that appears to have been reported so far from this morning’s earthquake is a woman who suffered cuts to her head from falling dishes, according to Kyodo news agency.

10:26pm
Earthquake downgraded to 6.9 magnitude
The US Geological Survey initially put the earthquake at a magnitude of 7.3 but later downgraded it to 6.9.

The tsunami warning is still in place for Japan's north-east coast.


 Follow
 Breaking News @BreakingNLive
#BREAKING; Map showing local ground acceleration as #Japan #earthquake propagated. #Japan #Tsunami @EqAlarm
6:44 PM - 21 Nov 2016
  341 341 Retweets   158 158 likes
10:14pm
Fire at petroleum refining facility brought under control
A fire broke out at a petroleum refining facility in the town of Iwaki, around 40 miles south of the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear plant, but was swiftly dealt with by local fire-fighting teams, Kyodo News agency reported.

10:13pm
Ring of Fire
Japan sits along the "Ring of Fire", a horseshoe-shaped area along the Pacific coasts of Asia and North and South America. 

The vast majority of major earthquakes and volcanoes occur along the ring, which is the result of fault lines on the boundaries of tectonic plates.

More than 1,000 earthquakes are recorded annually in Japan -  though few match the magnitudes recorded today - making it one of the most earthquake prone countries on earth.

Japan also has dozens of volcanoes, and a long history of natural disasters.

 
Paid content
Recommended by

10:08pm
Trains suspended 
Japan Railways has suspended operations of dozens of bullet trains operating in eastern Japan. The precaution has been taken so engineers can check tracks to make sure they have not been damaged by the earthquake, Julian Ryall reports.

10:01pm
Boats trying to get out to sea to avoid imminent tsunami waves
National broadcaster NHK immediately began showing images of coastal towns in Fukushima Prefecture and issuing warnings for local people to evacuate to higher ground, Julian Ryall reports.

The same message was repeated over tannoy systems operated by local authorities. Emergency vehicles could be seen on docks while fishing boats and other small vessels could be seen hastily putting to sea in an attempt to ride out the incoming waves. 

9:59pm
Flashbacks to the Great East Japan earthquake on 2011
Today's earthquake has prompted flashbacks to March 2011, when a 9.1 magnitude quake hit just off the Eastern coast, David Lawler writes.

That was the most powerful quake in Japan's history, and one of the largest recorded in modern history.

It triggered to a massive tsunami, with waves of up to 40 meters (133 feet) in height.

Watch | Explained: Fukushima nuclear plant clean-up
03:02
Nearly 16,000 people were killed by the earthquake and tsunami, with hundreds of thousands left at least temporarily homeless.

The tsunami also caused a meltdown at the Fukushima nuclear plant. No one was immediately killed in the nuclear disaster, though thousands were exposed to radiation.

9:56pm
Quake caused buildings to shake in Tokyo
The tremor caused tall buildings to sway in Tokyo, some 200 miles to the south, but there have been no immediate reports of significant damage, Julian Ryall reports.

The quake started off a as a slow undulating motion but quickly built up to more powerful shaking. The tremor lasted for more than a minute before tailing off, but was followed by at least one minor aftershock.

9:43pm
Fukushima nuclear plant being checked for earthquake damage
There were no immediate reports of damage or injury, which struck at 5:59 a.m. (2059 GMT).

Tokyo Electric Power Co was checking its nuclear plants in Fukushima for damage, public broadcaster NHK said. 

Tohoku Electric Power Co said there was no damage to its Onagawa nuclear plant.

Television footage showed ships moving out to sea from Fukushima harbours, as the meteorological agency warned of a tsunami of 3 metres (10 feet) for Fukushima, where Tepco's Daiichi nuclear plant was devastated in a March 2011 quake and tsunami.

View image on Twitter
View image on Twitter
 Follow
 The Weather Network ✔ @weathernetwork
BREAKING: Tsunami warning issued after preliminary Magnitude 7.3 earthquake strikes off coast of Fukushima, Japan. More details to come
6:39 PM - 21 Nov 2016
  185 185 Retweets   63 63 likes
Earthquakes are common in Japan, one of the world's most seismically active areas. Japan accounts for about 20 percent of the world's earthquakes of magnitude 6 or greater.

The March 11, 2011, quake was magnitude 9, the strongest quake in Japan on record. The massive tsunami it triggered caused world's worst nuclear crisis since Chernobyl a quarter of a century earlier.

The U.S. Geological Survey initially put Tuesday's quake at a magnitude of 7.3 but down graded it to 6.9.

All nuclear plants on the coast threatened by the tsunami are shutdown in the wake of the Fukushima disaster. Only two reactors are operating in Japan, both in the southwest of the country. Even when in shutdown nuclear plants need cooling systems operating to keep spent fuel cool.

9:28pm
Tsunami warning for waves of three metres (10 feet)
There is a live stream here - people by the coast are being warned to evacuate immediately.

Fukushima is under threat from the tsunami waves.

//BREAKING #Japan #Earthquake #japanearhquake 
Earthquake w/ magn of 7.3 at the coast of Fukushima (Local time: 6 am) pic.twitter.com/QkywwpfmqR

— Pieterjan De Coninck (@Pieterjan95) November 21, 2016
9:24pm
Earthquake epicentre
View image on Twitter
View image on Twitter
 Follow
 EMSC ✔ @LastQuake
powerful #earthquake (#地震) shakes Near East Coast of Honshu, Japan 20 min ago. Witnesses's reports:
6:20 PM - 21 Nov 2016
  108 108 Retweets   24 24 likes
 

9:24pm
7.3 magnitude earthquake strikes northern Japan
An earthquake of magnitude 7.3 struck early on Tuesday, local time, off the Japanese coast, some 67 km northeast of Iwaki, the U.S. Geological Survey said.

The USGS reported the depth of the quake at 10 km.
