Trump travel ban ignites tourism decline fears

Fearing a drop-off in international visits to the US after the Trump administration’s proposed travel restrictions, some hotel operators and tourism promoters across the country are launching campaigns to convince global travellers that America is as welcoming a destination as ever.

Experts are predicting declines in international visitors to the US this year for the first time since 2009. Among the hardest hit will be New York and Los Angeles.

Overall, the US is expected to see a year-on-year decline of nearly 2 million international visitors this year because of travellers’ changing perceptions about the nation, according to travel consulting group Tourism Economics. The shifting consumer sentiment is compounded by a stronger US dollar, making international travel to the US more expensive, particularly for Europeans.

Tourism authorities in major cities, along with smaller and midsize hotel chains, have started crafting messages meant to appeal to international travellers who may be on the fence about patronising the US.

Groups such as the US Travel Association, which represents airlines, hotels and other recreational businesses, argued this week that the administration needs to do a better job of communicating to international travellers who “may have been put off by the initial travel ban”.

A White House spokeswoman said it wasn’t surprising that cities such as New York and Los Angeles “generally not supportive of the president’s agenda” were “trying to make something out of nothing on this”. “The President is confident that the US will remain a hub of international tourism,” she said.

The US hotel industry hasn’t yet made any projections on potential lost revenue, but Tourism Economics projects the direct economic losses from the decline in visits will be about $US2.4 billion this year.

Larger global hotel chains, such as Hilton Worldwide Holdings and Marriott International have been much quieter about the political ramifications of the administration’s new ­policies.

Because of their global footprint, they are less exposed to a potential drop-off in visits to any single market such as the US.

Smaller regional operators say they don’t have the same flexibility.

Executives at Aqua-Aston Hospitality, a Hawaii firm that manages more than 50 hotel and timeshare properties, said the heightened political rhetoric around immigration over the past few months prompted the company to launch a new “tolerance, equality and diversity” campaign that will include ­opinion pieces and advertisements in international travel magazines and through online marketing.
