Trump Slump hurting tourism to the U.S.

I just returned from a long weekend in the United States. I won’t regale you with a travelogue, after all what happened in Vegas, will stay in Vegas.

While I was across the border, the story of two Indian foreign students being gunned down by a gun-wielding, “get out of my country,” veteran in Kansas City was front page news. Just another day in a new America?

A lot of my friends are chatting about their annual travel plans. I know folks who are determined to boycott travel to the United States. They refuse to support a nation that voted this man into the most powerful office in the world.

Others are worried about the actual process of crossing the border and they aren’t quite comfortable with what is on the other side. We have seen school boards cancel cross-border field trips out of concern for their students. Many local academics are choosing to skip annual conferences in American cities.

Who can blame them? Trump’s travel ban — and his daily rhetoric — has opened a can of ugly. "Bigly."

These choices are starting to make an impact. In Las Vegas, the restaurants were relatively empty and the hotels were cheaper than I’ve ever seen. The tourism workers we talked to are worried. They should be.

There has been a fair bit of coverage about the so-called “Trump Slump," as reported in many travel industry journals. The slump is potentially significant as travel experts are estimating varying degrees of impact on foreign tourism, with some projecting decreases of almost 20 per cent to the tourism market.

Tourism is big business in the United States and industry experts are projecting that billions of dollars will disappear from the U.S. economy in 2017. In a recent Travel Weekly article, the tourism board in New York City flat out describes the impact. They are expecting 300,000 fewer international visitors in 2017 and they also anticipate losing much of their lucrative conference and trade show business to other countries.

This leads me to my thoughts on this topic.

If we all boycott travel to the United States, the people who will suffer are the ones who need our support the most. Hundreds of thousands of low-paying jobs are in jeopardy. The front-line tourism workers, small businesses, minimum wage earners and immigrants. That frustrates me.

So, I will cross the border again this year and I will make choices. Many "red" states lost my tourism dollar on Nov. 9. That makes sense to me. That’s my prerogative as a consumer.