Trump's travel ban isn't the answer

President Trump’s revised executive order, banning most people from six Muslim-majority countries from entering the U.S., suffered a blow when a federal judge in Hawaii temporarily blocked the ban hours before it was to take effect. Hours later a Maryland Court delivered a similar ruling. The human rights risks posed by Trump’s ban have been averted – for now.

But Trump has already vowed to appeal. These court battles will continue, and the futures of thousands of people who have waited, in some cases for years, to relocate to the U.S. will remain uncertain. We need real leadership to protect human rights in South Carolina and around the country.

This is why Congress must act immediately to block this order, sending a message that Trump’s hatred can never be written into law. And Sen. Graham must help lead the way.

Sen. Graham spoke against the last order, saying it would “become a self-inflicted wound in the fight against terrorism.”

These concerns were echoed by over 130 former government officials in a letter shortly after the revised order was announced. They warned that the order will weaken security by giving the false impression that we are at war with Islam – playing right into the hands of those Trump claims he wants to fight.

This order is a reflection of Trump’s promises during the campaign to ban Muslims from entering the U.S. This was evidenced when the Hawaii court turned Trump’s words against him, using his racist statements as proof that this order was motivated by anti-Muslim animus.

Of course real threats exist, but this hateful order is not the answer. It is based on an unwarranted belief that refugees and anyone from the banned countries are inherently dangerous. They are used as boogeymen to justify morally reprehensible policies that have a devastating impact on people here and around the country.

This ban is an attempt to discriminate based on religion. It’s the same bigotry that Sen. Graham spoke out against last time – so why has he been silent on the new version? Why has Congress not held a hearing on this flawed policy?

It’s not just refugees who would suffer. We have a long, rich tradition of welcoming international students and staff from all over the world to live, study and teach here. They have enriched our economy, culture and standing on the world’s stage.