The tsunami

The first set of tsunami waves propagated across the Indian Ocean from east to west (Fig. 1), reaching the Seychelles, Socotra (Yemen) and the tip of Somalia almost simultaneously approximately 6 h after initiation (0659 UTC, 0959 EAT, 1059 IOT). Points farther south along the African coast, such as Lamu, Kenya and Zanzibar, Tanzania were affected after approximately 8 h (0859 UTC, 1159 EAT). Wave heights recorded by tide gauges and available from the University of Hawaii Sea Level Center (UHSLC, Fig. 2) show the decline in wave height from east to west, with wave heights significantly exceeding normal tidal variation in Sri Lanka and the Maldives by a ratio of 1.6–3.1. A large wave series reached Mauritius, exceeding normal tidal range by a ratio of 2.1. The wave height was only slightly greater than tidal variation in the Seychelles and Yemen (ratio of 1.2) and less than tidal variation in Kenya and Tanzania (ratio of 0.6). Farther south in Reunion, Madagascar, Mozambique and the Comoros, only minor waves/tidal surges were reported, likely due to the sheltering effect of shallow banks in the middle of the Indian Ocean (Seychelles bank, Saya de Malha and Cargados Carajos, Fig. 1).

Tide gauge data for sites in the Indian Ocean, plotted against Coordinated ...
Fig. 2. 
Tide gauge data for sites in the Indian Ocean, plotted against Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) for 26 and 27 December 2004. Data obtained from University of Hawaii Sea Level Center (UHSLC, http://ilikai.soest.hawaii.edu/uhslc/iotd/). y axes are scaled to approximately equivalent full tidal cycles for 25 December 2004, with high and low tide levels shown by the horizontal dotted lines. Numbers on each graph show: on left of slash, the ratio of maximum/minimum tide levels measured during the tsunami to those measured on 25 December/on right of slash, tidal range in cm measured on 25 December. The three columns of graphs represent: at right, reference sites where destructive impacts were very high (Mahe, Maldives and Colombo, Sri Lanka); center, sites where tsunami waves exceeded normal tidal range (Yemen; Mahe, Seychelles and Mauritius); and the left, sites where tsunami waves did not exceed the normal tidal range (Lamu, Kenya and Zanzibar, Tanzania).
Figure options
From observations reported in the media and UNEP [1] the primary wave had a height of up to 30 m along the northwest coast of Sumatra (Aceh Province) closest to the epicenter, up to 10 m high when it reached Phuket, Thailand, 5–6 m in Sri Lanka and the south coast of India, 4 m in the Maldives, 2.5–3 m in the Seychelles and northern Somalia, and about 1.0 m in Kenya and Tanzania, approximating an exponential decline in height with distance (Fig. 3).

Maximum tsunami wave height plotted against distance traveled across the Indian ...
Fig. 3. 
Maximum tsunami wave height plotted against distance traveled across the Indian Ocean. Wave heights are as reported in UNEP 2005 (with minimum also shown where reported), and in the media. The height of the wave decreased exponentially with distance from the source (r2=0.867 for media reports; r2=0.580 for UNEP maxima).
Figure options
Over 65 aftershocks, some of which measured over 6.0 on the Richter scale, were measured following the main earthquake, creating mini-tsunamis in the vicinity of the epi-center [3]. The Seychelles recorded a second set of tsunami waves about 5 h after the first, and two smaller ones 4–8 h later [1]. Observations of the tsunami waves on the Kenya coast extended from about 12:30 to 18:30 EAT, but reporting of later waves due to aftershocks is less certain as these would have occurred at night and at low tide, and were likely only visible on outer reef faces. A second tsunami alert occurred on 5 March 2005 in response to a 6.5 Richter earthquake from the same tectonic source as on 26 December 2004, however no tsunami waves were generated. Nevertheless, national alerts were sounded in a number of countries, including the Seychelles, Mauritius and Kenya.

3.2. Somalia, Socotra, Seychelles

Significant impacts from the tsunami were reported from northern Somalia, Socotra and the Seychelles (Table 2 and [1]). Because these areas were inundated by waves above the high tide line, damage to coastal infrastructure and terrestrial features was significant, as was the potential loss of life. Impacts in these countries were patchy, focused on low-lying land adjacent to the sea. In the Seychelles and Socotra these are restricted to narrow bays or river mouths, around which damage was focused. By contrast, the coast of Somalia is dominated by broad sandy plains just above sea level [5], with extensive settlement on the upper-beach and dunes such as at Hafun. Hence the massive impacts in terms of loss of life, and movement and damage to hazardous waste stores [1]. It is notable that the tide gauge data for Yemen (Fig. 2) shows an extended period during the night of 26–27 December when the mean tidal level was near the high tide mark and tsunami surges exceeded normal high tide levels, unlike other sites where the tidal pattern followed a more regular sine-curve with only brief periods at maximum high tide.

The major classes of impact in these countries are summarized from the UNEP Tsunami assessment report [1] and include the following:

•
Physical damage to shoreline and infrastructure. Shorelines less than 1–2 m above sea level were vulnerable to inundation by the tsunami depending on offshore topography. Construction and development tend to focus on flat coastal plains and these were most vulnerable, particularly evident at Hafun in Somalia and areas such as Mare Anglaise and the Port on Mahe in the Seychelles.
•
Loss of human life, generally from the surge of waves onshore and subsequent backwash into the sea. This occurred at Hafun in Somalia where the town was inundated by the waves. In the Seychelles and Socotra, most human habitation is higher above sea level on sloping rocky shores, and there was fortunately no mortality from the inundated areas mentioned above.
•
Backwash of materials and waste into the sea. Physical debris broken and displaced by the waves was evident at all locations surveyed, both on beaches, in the shallows and subtidally in coral reefs and seagrass areas in the Seychelles [6].
•
Damage to subtidal and intertidal habitats. Underwater surveys were only conducted in the Seychelles. Here significant damage occurred to coral reef frameworks weakened by near total mortality of branching corals in 1998 that had only partially re-cemented by the time of the tsunami. Such reefs suffered a second near-total destruction by wave action of the tsunami.
3.3. Mauritius, Madagascar, Comoros, Mozambique, Reunion

Apart from Mauritius, observations of the tsunami from these countries were minimal. A minor tidal surge was reported from Mayotte, part of the Comoros group of islands (F. Seguin, pers. commun.), but with no impacts noted on land or in the sea. The other countries and islands in this group were likely sheltered from the tsunami waves by shallow banks in the middle of the Indian Ocean, i.e. the Seychelles banks and Cargados Carajos shoals, reducing the energy stored in the waves by the time they crossed the ocean.

Observations from Mauritius have been obtained from the island of Rodrigues (E. Hardmann, pers. commun.). Rodrigues was hit by 7 waves occurring between about 1000 and 1700 IOT, with the water level reportedly rising approximately 2 m above the highest high tide level. Coastal areas including the main town, Port Mathurin, were flooded. An artificial sand island (Ile Hollandaise, created from dredged material from the shipping channel) suffered erosion and was split into two, and erosion has also been observed on sandy beaches in the south–east of the island. Smothering of corals at 6–12 m depth, by sediment moved by the tsunami, was reported in the vicinity of Port Mathurin, however, no physical damage or overturning of corals was recorded at any sites. For 2 months following the tsunami, observers commented that high and low tides were more extreme than usual. It is uncertain whether this might have been due to relative changes in shoreline, movement of sandbars, or oceanographic phenomena, or the result of subjective observation errors.

Other than the above observations, minimal damage was reported from Mauritius, perhaps because the normal tidal range on 25 December 2004 was only 56 cm (Fig. 2), and though two to four times larger than this, the tsunami was sufficiently dissipated to cause minimal damage.

3.4. Tanzania

Unusual tidal conditions reported for Kenya (below) were also experienced in northern Tanzania [7]. However neither physical damage to the shoreline nor underwater impacts to coral reefs have been reported from Tanzania. Tragically, 11 deaths occurred in the vicinity of Dar es Salaam, due to the extremely strong currents caused by tidal surges over intertidal flats. Newspapers reported them to be young, and possibly a family group [8].

3.5. Kenya

Primary observations for this section are summarized from observations reported in Kenya, collected through a questionnaire sent out by email and in the local press from 26 respondents to a questionnaire circulated in January 2005 [9]. Impacts were likely to be similar at adjacent locations in southern Somalia, and along the whole mainland coasts of Tanzania and Mozambique, diminishing from north to south (Fig. 1). Unlike sites closer to the origin of the tsunami, in Asia and even the Seychelles, Kenya experienced tidal surges, not breaking waves. Fortunately the tsunami height of approximately 1 m, and the effects of traveling 6000 km across the ocean prevented the buildup of a breaking wave on encountering shallow water.

Of the 26 questionnaire respondents, 16 were female and 10 male, and spread between the following status: coast residents (13), reef/marine-oriented business owners (7), Kenyan residents on holiday on the coast (3), government official (1), newspaper reporter (1), foreigner (1). Observations were received from the whole Kenya coast (Fig. 4), from Mkokoni/Kiwayu island in the north to Pemba channel in the south and with greater numbers of respondents in the central regions.

Map of the Kenya coast showing the distribution and number of questionnaire ...
Fig. 4. 
Map of the Kenya coast showing the distribution and number of questionnaire respondents.
Figure options
The earliest observations in Kenya were from 1230 EAT during a spring tide cycle as the tide was rising from a low of 0.5 m at 1024 EAT to a high tide of 2.6 m at 1631 EAT (Fig. 5). Full spring tides range from −0.1 to 4.1 m, thus maximum and minimum tides on the 26 December were well within normal ranges. Observations were made until about 1830 EAT, though several respondents indicate tidal surges did occur at night, but were largely unobserved due to the broad expanse of reef exposed on the spring low tide.

Tide levels from 26 to 27 December 2004 as documented by tide gauges (heavy ...
Fig. 5. 
Tide levels from 26 to 27 December 2004 as documented by tide gauges (heavy line, see Fig. 2 for source) and high/lows predicted by Tide Charts for Lamu (Grey circles, Kenya Tide Tables 2004) plotted on East Africa Standard Time (EAT). Vertical red lines show estimated maximum tidal surge amplitude based on questionnaire responses (1–1.5 m, centered on the tide height) starting at 12:30 h and ending at 18:00 h. Potential tidal surges during the night are also shown (dashed red lines). The figure clearly shows that tsunami effects fell well within the envelope of tidal variation for the Kenya coast, not exceeding maximum spring high tide levels of 4–4.1 m (+200 cm on the y axis) and not falling below minimum spring low tide levels of 0 m (−200 cm).
Figure options
At 1230 EAT, the tide was rising and reportedly first dropped by about 1 m, exposing intertidal flats that had just been covered by the rising tide. The clearest descriptions of the tsunami wave itself were from Malindi, where observers noted a wave approaching ‘from the north’ at a 45° angle to the coast (see Fig. 1), visible as a bulge in the sea beyond the reef. Because the coastline in Malindi lies in a northeast–southwest direction, a 45° angle actually implies a more easterly direction to the wave, corresponding to the main wavefronts depicted in Fig. 1. Malindi bay opens towards the north with a relatively exposed beach, and as the wave swept in reef waters became choppy, appearing to be ‘boiling’. The wave front was breaking and foaming over the reef and shallows and onto the relatively exposed beaches, causing immediate beach erosion and damage to anchored boats. At other locations in Kenya, the tsunami was less clearly wave-like and descriptions emphasize strong surge currents through channels or over shallow reef flats and beaches. Thus, the effect was more akin to tidal surges or rapid cycles, with a full in-out cycle lasting 10 min with an amplitude of 1–1.5 m.

Observations vary, but the largest number of down-and-up surges reported was 8–10, with the last one occurring around 1800 EAT, just after high tide. Surges were apparently not evenly spaced, occurring in clusters with gaps of stable tide levels in between. In general observers indicated that the first surge was the largest and strongest, between about 1230 and 1330 EAT, with decreasing amplitudes later during the day. Reports of the minimum and maximum water levels with respect to normal low and high tide varied, though these are only indicate as respondent's views on this is very subjective. The observation from Mkokoni/Kiwaiyu in the north noted that the tidal surge reached both extreme low and high tide levels. Only one other observer, from Malindi, stated that the tidal surges reached normal neap low and spring high tide levels. For all sites at least from Lamu southwards, it seems likely that the tidal surges never dropped below maximum spring low tides, nor rose above maximum spring highs.

During the surges, strong currents were observed, causing rippled and choppy surface waves up to knee high, with one estimate of 4–5 knot currents. Many observers noted that waters were brown and turbid, from stirring of sediments during the surges. Choppy surface waves were noted from Malindi, Bamburi and Pemba channel. Where they occurred, choppy rough conditions were likely due to conflicting currents due to the tides and tsunami surges, not to the tsunami wave itself breaking. Particularly in Malindi Bay which is not protected by a fringing reef unbroken ocean waves interacted with tidal currents, all magnified by the orientation of the bay facing north trapping the wavefronts and forcing them to break in the bay. Other areas were apparently calm such as in Nyali, with different observers observing ‘glassy’ or ‘choppy’ conditions. At Mkokoni/Kiwaiyu in the north and Pemba channel in the south fishing boats offshore did not notice the tsunami waves at all.

Sand movement and reorganization of beach profiles was reported for northern Kenya where soft substrate habitats predominate and the waves were largest. In Lamu, the tsunami caused a dramatic reorganization of beach structure, eroding 1–2 m of sand from a channel-edge beach at Shela village and constructing new sandbars in the open bay in front of the island. Because the waves did not exceed the high tide line, no damage to shore-based infrastructure was noted, including in Kilindini Harbor in Mombasa, where the Kenya Port Authority was on alert having noted the rapid changes in water level.

Subtidal impacts of the tsunami waves in Kenya were limited. Only one clear case of a large coral head being overturned by the waves was noted, in the Kiunga Marine National Reserve. This was of >3 m diameter plates of Turbinaria mesenterina in a high-current mangrove creek channel that had been in place for the preceding 7 years and untouched by regular tidal currents (pers. obs.). Other cases of slumped large coral boulders and bommies may have been from regular storm waves and tidal currents. Over 300 marked coral colonies on shallow lagoon reefs (<0.5 m) in the Mombasa area showed no signs of damage or overturning from the waves (S. Mangubhai, pers. commun.).

The primary damage reported was to boats and fishing gear. Many boats at anchor were dragged due to pulling of their anchors, knocking against each other and suffering damage. Malindi reported the highest level of damage to boats due to the exposed orientation of the bay and many boats were deposited on the beach. Fishing gear (e.g. nets, traps, lines) on boats and on the beach in Malindi were also lost. There were few confirmed reports of similar damage in other parts of Kenya, where boats were either saved or boat owners where on-hand managing their boats as the surges came in and out.

The 26 December is a public holiday in Kenya (Boxing Day), thus many public and recreational beach areas are very crowded with people from late morning onwards. Many people entering the water on the beaches, taking advantage of the shallow waters on the rising tide, reported strong currents especially during the receding phase of the waves. Reports from Mombasa indicate currents were strong enough to pull people out. The one fatality reported for Kenya was of an upcountry man visiting the sea for the first time and entering it to learn how to swim [10]. By the time others around him noticed that he had been dragged away, it was too late to save him.

Ironically, news of the tsunami was available in East Africa by about 1000 EAT, 2–3 h before impacts locally, from global cable television networks such as CNN, Fox News and the BBC World Service. Even more pertinently, a yacht router based in France gave accurate warnings to clients that contacted the company for information, accurately predicting the scale and timing of waves reaching the east African coast.
