Wisconsin tourism seeks to build on $19.3 billion boom

STURGEON BAY - It’s a three-mile drive in an enclosed and heated all-terrain vehicle to the dark red fishing shacks sitting on a foot-and-a-half of ice off the Door County shore.

Inside one of the shacks, three buddies from Michigan drop fishing lines into the water. A loose group of a dozen whitefish laid on the ice and snow outside the door are the fruit of an early February day spent ice fishing.

This is how JJ Malvitz, the 25-year-old owner of JJ’s Guide Service in Sturgeon Bay, makes a living. He serves 400 to 500 customers a year, taking them out on the ice to fish in style. They come from Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota and points beyond.

“I’ve had people from as far as Florida and Texas who want to come experience what ice fishing is all about,” said Malvitz. “It’s one thing to read about it, hear about it, but to actually put your feet on the frozen water is sometimes surreal for people.”

Winter is an inescapable fact of life in the Upper Midwest. Sure, some employers will say it's a hurdle when trying to recruit people from other parts of the country to visit, live and work here, but it also makes for good business. And winter tourism is just part of a multi-billion-dollar Wisconsin tourism industry that is in the midst of a boom, and which is looking to grow even more.

The American Birkebeiner ski races in Hayward brought more than 10,000 people to northern Wisconsin last year in February — with a total economic impact of $20 million in the area, according to Sports Destination Management. (The Birkie was canceled this year for lack of snow.) In central Wisconsin, Granite Peak Ski Area, the ski hill near Wausau, is estimated to bring in more than $27 million to the Marathon County economy each winter.

All told, tourism in Wisconsin — including all those summer camping trips, weekend getaways to Door County during cherry season and visits to Milwaukee to hit up the Milwaukee Art Museum or catch a Brewers game — had a $19.3 billion economic impact in 2015 and supported about 191,000 jobs, according to an annual report from the Wisconsin Department of Tourism.

And JJ’s Guide Service is a microcosm of the state’s tourism industry: What happens on the ice has a ripple effect to other area businesses, especially with an uptick in ice fishing on the bay in recent years.

His clients spend money on food, lodging, gas and retail. That helps generate seasonal business that might not otherwise be there.

“I can name on two hands how many resorts, inns and hotels that traditionally used to close in the winter because there was no business, but this influx of ice anglers to the area … has offered a little more incentive to keep their doors open.” Malvitz said.