How Donald Trump’s immigration edict will affect American tourism

THERE are many ways to look at Donald Trump’s decision to ban travellers from seven countries with predominantly Muslim populations. Whether Mr Trump's order is legal, moral or self-defeating has been discussed at length elsewhere on this site. Here on Gulliver, however, we are mostly concerned with what the move means for the future of travel to America.
The executive order which the president signed on January 27th restricts immigration from Iran, Iraq, Sudan, Syria, Libya, Somalia and Yemen. Mr Trump says the aim of the edict is to thwart terrorism. It affects travellers on all types of visas (other than diplomatic and UN ones) and refugees and will be in force for 90 days (indefinitely in the case of Syrian refugees). It is still unclear exactly what it means for dual nationals or those with green cards, although Reince Priebus, the White House chief of staff, said that American green card holders would be unaffected. Those who have recently visited any of the proscribed countries may be subject to extra scrutiny. Boris Johnson, Britain’s foreign secretary, said Britons with dual nationality who had not recently travelled to one of the seven countries would not be hit by the ban.
The direct impact to tourism of a travel ban from these countries will be small. Each sends a piddling number of visitors to America. There is no majority-Muslim country among America’s 20 biggest inbound markets (although India, the 11th biggest source of visitors, has a sizeable Muslim minority). But there is another concern. Will the decree—easily interpreted as a deep hostility to the world beyond America's shores—put off global travellers?
“It is too soon to tell if this will have a larger reputational impact,” says Douglas Quimby of PhocusWright, a travel-market research outfit. However, when the firm surveyed Europeans in November, it found that a third of German travellers, and a fifth of British and French ones, said they were less likely to visit America as a result of Mr Trump’s victory. If it ran the survey again in light of recent events, those percentages would probably increase: many of the travellers surveyed expressed hope that Mr Trump’s brash pre-election promises were mere bluster.
Such figures tend to say more about sentiment than action: it is easy to sound moralistic when you are not going to be held to account. (In Britain, around half of respondents tell pollsters that they are prepared to pay higher taxes to fund the National Health Service; it will be a long time before a political party that takes them at their word is elected.) In any case, some travellers surveyed by PhocusWright said that Mr Trump’s victory made it more likely that they would visit America. Still, the 14.2m Americans who rely on tourism for their jobs will have to hope that travellers will not necessarily follow their intentions.
Not all visits to America are optional. Around 15% of visitors to the United States arrive on business (down from about 25% in 2007) according to the Department of Commerce. Corporations will not make a moral judgement on Donald Trump before deciding whether to fly an executive out to America. But they will be concerned what state the economy is in, and how easy it is for their employees to enter America. If Mr Trump's protectionism results in less business between America and the rest of the world, the number of international travellers could fall. If the president forces more travellers to attend visa interviews—something the Los Angeles Times says the president is mulling over—or tinkers with visa-waiver programmes, this could have similar effects. Conference organisers may decide to relocate events if they think that delegates will have trouble entering the country. 
Despite all the uncertainty the recent ban has caused, it may not be the biggest threat to the tourism industry. “A bigger direct concern is actually Mexico,” says Mr Quimby. Mexico is America’s second largest inbound market after Canada, accounting for some 18.4m visits in 2015. Talk of walls, repatriating jobs and tearing up trade deals may spur Mexican travellers to turn elsewhere. “Mexico has been a growing inbound market for the US,” continues Mr Quimby. “The current situation has many in the industry worried.”

They are probably right to be. A country hitherto renowned for its warm welcome suddenly feels awfully frosty.