Impact of National Travel and Tourism Strategy Implementation

The National Travel and Tourism Strategy establishes a goal of welcoming and supporting 100
million annual international visitors by 2021, while also encouraging Americans to see all that
America has to offer. The Strategy outlines federal efforts to promote the United States, enable
travel and tourism to and within the United States, provide world class customer service and
visitor experience, coordinate across government, and provide research and measure results.
The Strategy is being implemented across the U.S. government through the Tourism Policy
Council, the interagency committee chaired by the Secretary of Commerce that includes
representatives from the Departments of State, Treasury, the Interior, Agriculture, Labor,
Defense, Transportation and Homeland Security, as well as the Small Business Administration.
Federal agencies and Brand USA—the country’s nonprofit travel promotion corporation—are
piloting a program to create integrated strategic plans at the country level to increase demand for
travel to the United States. The plans will also ensure that federal agencies plan for downstream
effects to meet consumer demand for services and provide a quality visitor experience. Strategies
include marketing and promotional activities, communicating U.S. entry policies, increasing
participation in trusted traveler programs, anticipating entry volumes, and maximizing the
benefits of Open Skies and other international aviation agreements. The first pilot location is the
United Kingdom.
Brand USA is also promoting the United States in traditional and emerging markets, working
with partners and destinations from across the country. Overall, Brand USA now has
representation in nearly 20 international markets.
Federal agencies will continue to work, collaboratively and independently, to implement the
Strategy. From interviewing visa applicants, to processing travelers at U.S. ports of entry, to
screening passengers in our airports, agencies are reengineering processes and redeploying
resources with an eye to facilitating a growing number of travelers in a way that enhances our
national security