Ottawa, province invest in tourism for Nova Scotia's Eastern Shore

The federal government is pumping in $261,000 to grow tourism on Nova Scotia’s Eastern Shore.

Central Nova MP Sean Fraser said the money will go to the Destination Eastern and Northumberland Shores Nova Scotia Association. The funding will allow the association to conduct research on the history and culture of the 100 Wild Islands area.

“The incredible interest and enthusiasm that this project has generated from its many partners and these communities bodes well for its success,” said Fraser in a release.

DEANS’s project will facilitate the development of sustainable experiential tourism products and include workshops to create service offerings in communities between Musquodoboit Harbour and Sherbrooke, as well as the development of a branding framework for the Eastern Shore.

Other funding partners include the Government of Nova Scotia with a contribution of $40,500 and the Halifax Regional Municipality with a contribution of $37,200.

Additional support for the project comes from the Nova Scotia Nature Trust, DEANS itself, the Sheet Harbour Chamber of Commerce and the Municipality of the District of St. Mary’s.

The Nova Scotia Nature Trust, an association dedicated to the protection of Nova Scotia’s natural habitats and native species, is the primary leader and advocate for conservation efforts in the 100 Wild Islands area.

DEANS managing director Cindy MacKinnon said Ottawa’s contribution recognizes the importance of progress already made by a tourism development strategy recently completed for the area of Musquodoboit Harbour to Sherbrooke.

This next phase will focus on developing the area as a sustainable tourism destination to provide increased economic benefits and increased tourism visitation.

MacKinnon said it was vital “to raise the bar on our products and experiences to motivate first-time visitors to meet and exceed their expectations.”

“Focusing on the area’s unique selling proposition; the pristine wild islands archipelago, that is easily accessible from the coastal highway and its side roads as well as directly from the Atlantic Ocean, will help us reach that level,” said MacKinnon.