One million British travellers predicted to boycott Trump's United States - will you still visit?

ccasionally in your job as a journalist, you find yourself having to retrace your steps to something you wrote in the dim or recent past. The joy of the internet is that everything which emerges from your laptop can be hauled back into the daylight, and reappraised.

Eight months ago, I penned an opinion piece which looked at Donald Trump’s increasingly unstoppable progress towards the Republican party nomination, and asked whether his particularly coarse and unpleasant brand of politics (I think that’s the simplest way to describe it this morning) would deter people from taking a holiday in the USA.

It is a question that is surely worth asking again, now that the US election result is at the top of just about every conceivable news agenda – and now that the man who was once an implausible outside candidate for the most powerful job on the planet is going to become the 45th president of the United States. You can find the original article here.

The gist of my argument was that was that a travel destination should not be judged on the quality and suitability of its leader and government. That it should be considered on the beauty of its scenery, the vibrancy of its cities, the grandeur of its mountains, the softness of its beaches, the fineness and variety of its food, the friendliness of its people.

I must admit that, when I produced these words eight months ago, I didn't believe that Donald Trump would be heading for the White House on this damp November morning. Some may find this a reason to be cheerful. Many are finding it a reason to be terrified.


Already, the murmurs have started. Airline comparison website Cheapflights.co.uk has reported a steady decline in searches for America since the battle for the White House began in earnest – which may be a sign that the incoming commander-in-chief is not to a lot of British travellers’ tastes.

Has the Big Apple lost a little of its lustre?
Has the Big Apple lost a little of its lustre? CREDIT: © SEAN PAVONE / ALAMY STOCK PHOTO/SEAN PAVONE / ALAMY STOCK PHOTO
Or it may be that would-be tourists are sick of the bickering that has defined a thoroughly nasty campaign – or simply that people are not considering a long weekend in New York when the weather there is so cold and blustery.

“It’s too early to say what the long term effect on travel to the USA will be following this morning’s news – there are a lot of variables in play,” says Cheapflights’ Andrew Shelton. And he’s right.


He goes on to add that “we know that the USA is perennially the most popular long-haul destination for British holidaymakers, with New York being the most searched-for city in the world – but the reality of a Trump White House may drive further uncertainty.

It could mean that Britons delay booking their Stateside holidays until the dust settles – or even consider switching to an alternative destination, such as Canada.”

A coup d'etat didn't stop us visiting the Maldives
A coup d'etat didn't stop us visiting the Maldives CREDIT: FYLE - FOTOLIA
I’m not sure about the second point here – Canada is a fine and fascinating country, but I cannot envisage it replacing the USA in British travel affections.