INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL TO THE UNITED STATES 

International trade has been a major area of interest to economists
especially with regard to physical goods. Only recently have economists
started investigating the economics of international travel
(Gray 19701.
The evaluation of international travel has been hampered primarily
by the lack of consistent and accurate data sets. Furthermore,
for countries such as the U.S., the exportation of travel services has
been considered of minor importance when compared to U.S. exports
of finished goods and agricultural products. This has recently
changed.
For the most part the economic evaluation of international travel
has investigated the demand by Americans for travel services provided
by foreign countries. A major determinant for expenditures
per capita on travel services is a measure of the income of the country
from which the travelers originate. Conceptually, the larger the real
per capita income of a country, the more likely its citizens can afford
to purchase travel services abroad, all else equal. Empirical studies
by Gray (19661, Kwack (1972) and Little (1980) support this hypothesis.

Additionally, it has been argued that the exchange rate may also
have a significant effect on international travel. Travelers are concerned
with the price of foreign currency. Thus, if the price of foreign
currency declines, travelers will demand more foreign travel services,
all else equal. Hence, for example, if the price of a vacation in Great
Britain remained constant in the last two years in terms of pounds
sterling, but the price of the pound declined significantly in terms
of dollars in the second year, one might expect Americans to import
more travel services from Great Britain in the second year. 

Recently, the effect of relative prices has also been suggested as
an important explanatory variable of international travel. (Previously,
only exchange rate movements were considered of import
[Little 19801.) More precisely, one expects travelers to react to
changes in prices of the exporting country relative to prices in the
home country or prices in alternative tourist/travel locations. Hence,
as relative prices decline one would anticipate an increase in the
quantity of international travel services imported by the home country,
all else equal.
International travel is also dependent upon the major transportation
costs involved. One would anticipate an increase in relative
transportation costs would result in a decline in international travel,
all else equal. However, most studies have eliminated this variable
from the analysis for two reasons: (a) it is difficult to obtain accurate
data on transportation costs and (b) in those studies where a relative
transportation cost variable was incorporated, primarily insignificant
statistical results were obtained. (Gray 1966; Little 1980).
Finally, the effects of special events may influence the demand for
foreign travel. Such events include political disturbances, World’s
Fairs, Olympic Games, etc. One would expect, for example, that the
demand for travel services in a given country by foreigners would be
positively affected by the location of the Olympic Games in the host
country. That is, one would expect the Olympic Games to induce
international travel to the country and to raise the volume of exports
of travel services beyond that which would normally occur, all else
equal. Similarly, political unrest would result in a decline in travel
to a country so afflicted. 