Growth in national travel and tourism

Travel and tourism’s importance in the U.S. economy has grown
steadily over the last half century. From 1956 to 1999, growth in the basic
travel and tourism industries outpaced U.S. GDP growth in all but four
years (Chart 1). As a result, travel and tourism’s share of overall output
more than doubled during that period. Rising incomes in the United
States and abroad are likely responsible for much of the industry’s growth
in recent decades, although other factors have contributed as well. 
During economic expansions, the travel and tourism industry has
historically behaved like a luxury good. When incomes rise, demand for
luxury goods increases more than proportionally, as people are able to
spend a smaller share of their income on necessary items like food and
clothing.9 Thus, during periods of economic growth, demand for
luxury goods should rise rapidly. In every economic expansion of the
past fifty years, output in the travel and tourism industry grew faster
than overall national output.
As income growth slows or even declines during economic recessions,
demand for luxury goods should fall even more quickly. Yet
during the economic recessions of the second half of the 20th century,
travel and tourism output usually did not fall any more than the overall
economy. Indeed, travel and tourism output continued to rise in the
1990-91 recession and during the recessions of the 1950s and 1960s.
One explanation given by researchers for why travel and tourism activity
has held up—or even grown—during economic downturns is that,
while travel spending in general may be a luxury, taking some kind of
vacation may be a necessity (Ryan).
The experience of 2001-02, however, differs from any other recession
and recovery period in recent history. Real output in the travel and
tourism industry declined more than 5 percent in 2001, even though
both real GDP and real per capita disposable income rose slightly that
year. Likewise, the BEA’s travel and tourism satellite accounts show that
real national tourism-related sales fell another 2 percent in 2002, even
as national output and incomes increased moderately. This atypical
behavior of travel and tourism since 2001 would suggest that other
shocks besides recession have recently impacted the industry, which has
indeed been the case. 