Samoa tsunami: more than 100 dead on Pacific islands
More than 100 people have been killed and hundreds injured after a tsunami, triggered by a powerful undersea earthquake, struck the Pacific islands of Samoa and American Samoa.
This video isn't encoded for your device
Link to this video
By Paul Chapman in Wellington 6:45AM BST 30 Sep 2009
A series of five large waves smashed into the chain of low-lying islands, sweeping away costal villages and tourist resorts.
Misa Telefoni, Samoa's deputy prime minister, issued an urgent appeal for international aid.
He said the country's infrastructure had been badly damaged.
Samoa's disaster management office said it feared at least 100 people had died, with many more injured.
Ausegalia Mulipola, the office's assistant chief executive, said: "There have been reports of villages where most of the houses have been run over by the sea.
Related Articles
Samoa tsunami: nine members of one family die 30 Sep 2009
Samoa tsunami: Japan's Pacific coast on high alert 30 Sep 2009
Samoa tsunami: 10 facts about tsunamis 30 Sep 2009
Pacific tsunami: Samoan tourist resorts devastated 30 Sep 2009
Tsunami kills 'dozens' 29 Sep 2009
Tsunami hits Samoa 29 Sep 2009
"Some areas have been flattened and the tsunami has brought a lot of sand onshore, so there have been reports the sand has covered some of the bodies."
In the village of Lalomanu, on the southeast coast of Upolu, Samoa's main island, at least 40 were believed to have died.
The search for victims was being hampered by destroyed roads and damaged communications.
Reports spoke of bodies lying in muddy quagmires under coconut trees where they had been washed up.
The tsunami was recorded at just over 5 feet above sea level in Apia, the Samoan capital.
Thousands of people escaped by fleeing to higher ground, where they remained stranded in need of shelter and supplies with no homes to return to.
Russell Hunter, editor of the Samoa Observer newspaper, said the tsunami struck at the worst possible time, in the early morning when children were on their way to school.
Several schools were swamped and children are believed to be among the victims.
Ross Arden, the New Zealand police liaison officer based in Apia, said tourist villages on the south coast of Upolu had been badly affected.
He said a number of Western tourists were evacuated in their pyjamas and had lost all their possessions.
The New Zealand High Commission in Samoa confirmed that at least two New Zealand holidaymakers had been injured.
Graeme Ansell, a New Zealand tourist, said the resort of Sau Sau Beache Fale had been wiped out by the tsunami.
Speaking by mobile phone from his refuge on top of a nearby hill, he said: "It was very quick and it's all been flattened. There isn't a building left standing. We need help."
Rua McCarney, a Samoa resident, said at least three schoolchildren were "killed when the waves came through".
Daniela Brussani, an expatriate Italian, reported that her tourist resort on Upolu had been flattened.
In neighbouring American Samoa, the tsunami swept into Pago Pago, the capital, sending sea water surging more than 100 yards inland, turning streets to mud and stranding cars.
President Barack Obama declared the tiny US overseas territory, where at least 14 were confirmed dead, to be a "major disaster" zone.
The US Federal Emergency Management Agency said it was deploying two emergency assistance teams.
Eni Faleomavaega, American Samoa's delegate to the US Congress said "a tidal wave 15 feet in height" had hit in some places.
"Some of the areas there are only a few feet above sea level, so you can imagine the devastation," he said.
Many buildings in the islands were damaged by the earthquake itself, which measured 8.0 on the Richter scale.
The quake hit at 17.48GMT Tuesday, some 120 miles from Apia, and was followed by at least one large aftershock.
It triggered a Pacific-wide tsunami alert by the Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre in Hawaii.
On Boxing Day 2004, a quake in the Indian Ocean generated a tsunami that killed tens of thousands of people in Asia.
Samoa is located in the Pacific "ring of fire", a zone known for intense tectonic activity.
