Discussion
The eastern African region was significantly impacted by the tsunami, particularly for the easternmost islands and landmasses including the Seychelles, Socotra and at Hafun on the horn of Somalia. At these locations the height and volume of the tsunami waves were greater than normal tidal ranges, and were experienced as breaking waves. They were sufficient to cause significant physical damage on low-lying coastal areas including flooding and damage to physical infrastructure such as seawalls, beachfronts and roads, and in Hafun where there was human habitation immediately above the beach there were significant deaths (Table 2, [1]). Where underwater damage assessments were conducted (e.g. in the Seychelles, [6] ;  [11]) significant damage was recorded to underwater habitats such as coral reefs and seagrass beds.

The westernmost parts of the region, including most of the east African mainland coast (southern Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique) and the other islands (Mauritius, Madagascar, Comoros, Mayotte, Reunion and the western islands of the Seychelles), experienced significantly smaller wave heights, in many cases less than normal tidal ranges. Further, the tsunami ‘waves’ were experienced as tidal surges lasting 5–10 min, as opposed to breaking wavefronts. At these locations coastal flooding was only reported for the islands of Rodrigues and Mauritius, and deaths were only reported from Kenya (1) and Tanzania (11), where people wading on sandflats or in the shallows were overcome by the intense currents generated by the tidal surges. In Kenya the victim was known to be a non-swimmer, and the majority of victims in Tanzania were in one family party, also likely to be non- or poor-swimmers.

Three factors are likely to be the most important in minimizing impacts of the tsunami in the eastern African region:

(a)
Most of the region lies at least 6000 km from Sumatra and the earthquake epicenter (Fig. 2 ;  Fig. 4) resulting in diminution of the wave energy and therefore height. Even at 4500–5000 km the Seychelles and tip of Somalia experienced large and damaging waves. The epicenter of the volcanic explosion that destroyed Krakatau and sent tsunami waves across the Indian Ocean in 1883 is in the same geographic region, further south and east along the Sumatra–Java chain of islands in Indonesia.
(b)
The Seychelles banks, bearing the central granitic islands and several outer coralline islands of the Seychelles, and other shallow banks such as the Chagos Archipelago, Saya de Malha and Cargados Carajos shoals lie in the middle of the Indian Ocean (Fig. 1). These banks vary between 10 and 30 m depth, which would cause significant dissipation of tsunami waves with wavelengths on a scale of 10–100 km. The shallow waters of the Seychelles bank were implicated in the much-reduced impact of the tsunami on more centrally located islands on the plateau compared to those on the eastern edge ([1] ;  [6]), and this effect likely sheltered all areas located in a broad swath from southern Kenya to Reunion and including Tanzania, Mozambique, Madagascar, Comoros, Mayotte and the western islands of the Seychelles (Fig. 1).
(c)
The first set and largest tsunami waves were experienced at low tide throughout the region, and certainly in Kenya and Tanzania, and likely in Somalia, minimizing their threat to land above the high tide line.
Because of the first two of these reasons, most of eastern Africa is likely to be relatively safe from future tsunamis from the same tectonically active region, though the third factor, that the tsunami reached East Africa at low tide, was serendipitous. Nevertheless, a larger earthquake is theoretically possible (see Table 1), and the magnification of a few decimal points up the Richter scale could yet be disastrous for the region. There are no closer earthquake sources of a similar magnitude for the Indian Ocean seafloor. Two other areas that register as earthquake epicenters include the Bengal Plate off India and a volcanically active zone off northeastern Madagascar and the Comores [3]. The latter registered an earthquake of Magnitude 5.0 on 5 January 2005, though the epicenter apparently does not have the characteristics for generating tsunamis, being too deep in the earth's crust. As yet, no tsunamis or wave disturbances have been reported from these or other sources in the Indian Ocean.

The lack of a tsunami warning system for the Indian Ocean undoubtedly contributed to the massive human mortality recorded in all countries at least 1 h distant from the epicenter, and in the case of the eastern African region, all the deaths recorded there. Physical damage was minor in relation to countries closer to the epicenter, though it is clear that tsunami damage prevention measures would have further minimized damages in the Seychelles, Socotra and Somalia. Accordingly, intergovernmental initiatives to establish a tsunami warning system for the Indian Ocean comparable to that in the Pacific are underway [12] ;  [13], and will include identification and funding of a central coordinating body with links to earthquake and tsunami warning capabilities within and outside the region, and embedded in a more general hazard early warning and response context.

Private-sector/independent communication channels (cable television and a maritime information service provider) provided the only available information resource for eastern Africa, and would have been sufficient to raise a coordinated response that could theoretically have eliminated all loss of life in East Africa. However one either had to have direct access to cable television and the knowledge to interpret the information, or one had to know the contacts for private information sources to access them. However this information served no public purpose without the mechanisms for interpreting and channeling it to the right decision nodes and subsequent communication to the public and local authorities. Formal tsunami warning responses for the Pacific, while aware of the earthquake in Sumatra and presumably of the likelihood of an Indian Ocean tsunami, were unavailable for call-in queries on tsunami likelihood or responses in the Indian Ocean (pers. obs.), and their only reported unofficial means of communication, through US embassies and contacts in countries of the region [14] were unavailable or ineffectual.

In Kenya, two sets of mechanisms were set in motion that resulted in some level of public announcement of the tsunami threat, however both were marred by unclear channels for decision-making and action, and they occurred only as responses to observed conditions locally not to advance warnings. The first involved observations with the Mombasa Port by the Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) of unusual and changing tidal conditions from about 1200 EAT. This resulted in a local radio and police announcement in Mombasa, and checks by KPA officials at other minor ports (e.g. in Lamu) by 1800 EAT, but with little generalized response. The second involved channeling of observations from people along the coast through mutual contacts eventually to the Ministerial level and subsequent radio warnings and police action to clear public beaches. But final action did not occur until about 1800 EAT when the worst of the waves had already passed. In both cases (a) an early warning system would have enabled timely responses, and (b) emergency channels of communication and response to police and local authorities were not well known or practiced. In the second example, none of the communications would have occurred without mobile phone and text messaging technology, and this should be built in as a core platform for any future communication and response plans. Lastly, even where a local response to clear the beaches was attempted the public in general had to be almost ‘beaten from the beaches,’ not having any sense of trust or belief in the warnings being given them even by personnel in authority such as marine park rangers or the police. To be effective, future warning systems will have to include public awareness drives.

Many countries in east and southern Africa suffer drought and flood warnings on an almost annual basis as changing regional weather patterns and environmental degradation combine to increase vulnerability of natural and agriculture ecosystems. Typically, national disaster initiatives and institutions have focused on these drought and flood-related hazards, evidenced by membership and hosting of disaster response committees; in Kenya primary responsibilities rest with the Meteorological Department (warning: weather and climate prediction) and the Office of the President (response: security and resource mobilization). Severe drought and famine across much of Kenya in early 2006, and the lack of early preparedness and avoidance strategies nationally, emphasize how even with the most commonly faced hazards capacity lags far behind current needs.

Similarly, the impacts of and response to the tsunami in East Africa relate strong lessons on the state of coastal disaster preparedness in countries of the region. The strongest regional instrument relating to the environment, the Nairobi Convention (the Convention on the Protection and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern African Region), to which all states in Eastern Africa are party, addresses issues of marine pollution and protected areas, but does not contain language relevant to hazard or natural disasters or hazard preparedness. Partly as a result of this marine and coastal hazard preparedness have been subordinate to other regional priorities. While the concepts of Integrated Coastal Zone Management have been rapidly adopted under the umbrella of the Nairobi Convention, natural hazard and disaster preparedness have not featured in key national documents and processes e.g. [15] ;  [16]. The most significant hazard to strike coastal regions in the region prior to the tsunami, the severe flooding in Mozambique in 2001, found disaster warning and preparedness in relation to inundation of low-lying areas completely lacking.

In spite of the lack of concerted coastal hazard preparedness, a number of initiatives do serve as a foundation. For example, the Eastern African Coastal and Marine Environment Resources Database and Atlas project of the Nairobi Convention/UNEP Regional Seas programme in the late 1990s provided the first recently updated maps of major resources and infrastructure in selected countries e.g. [17], though at very course national resolution. These then formed the basis of coastal datasets in National Oceanographic Data Centers in each country. Building on this, a recent Kenya–Danish collaboration project (KenSea project, Environmental Sensitivity Map for Coastal Area of Kenya) is building a GIS decision-support tool for oil spill mitigation, providing the first detailed inundation risk maps for the Kenya coast. Nevertheless such information resources are patchy, are often based on incomplete datasets due to historically low investment in long term data collection at national levels and may need additional resources to generalize them to other hazards (in this case such as high waves or storm surges). With respect to minimizing risk from hazards, zoning and building restrictions along coastlines in the region are generally nonexistent, or where present poorly conceived and formulated, and regularly flouted, providing a wholly inadequate foundation for minimizing inundation risk and response capability.

Appropriately, among the most significant consequences of the tsunami is the energizing of national, regional and global undertakings to develop tsunami and natural hazard warning systems that cover the Indian Ocean as part of global warning networks [12]. These new-generation warning systems are explicitly being developed to cover multiple marine and coastal hazards and cover the full range of capacities including data and information systems, communication networks, and intergovernmental commitments and national response capacities [18]. They must also incorporate adaptive mechanisms and private sector partners to compensate for institutional inertia in government sectors. The mainland coast of East Africa and the western Indian Ocean Islands were fortunate in the low impacts experienced from the December 2004 tsunami. However population growth, migration to coastal zones, long-term environmental degradation and resource overexploitation and Global Climate Change will all contribute to greater vulnerability of people, infrastructure and ecosystems on coastlines. Improving disaster preparedness and warning systems to minimize the impacts of these threats should become one of the most important long-term consequences of this recent event.

Acknowledgments
Many individuals contributed information incorporated in this manuscript, and improved the text. I would like to acknowledge Ali Mohammed, Ann Robertson, Brenda Brainch, Bruce Phillips, Carol Korschen, Chris Angell, Flora Mutuga, Hussein Alidina, James Nokes , Joan Nesbitt, Kate Moran, Korinna Cowan, Lisa Pelizzoli, Lulu Archer, Melinda Rees, Mohammed Omar, Nicky Parazzi, Paul Krystall, Paula Kahumbu, Ralph and Lucy Diaper, Ralph Winter, Sangeeta Mangubhai, Sayaka Tsutsumi, Shakil Visram, Simon Englefield, Stephanie Maxwell, Sylvia Delap and Ulrike Neubert.
