Measuring travel and tourism

Most researchers would likely agree with the definition of travel
and tourism provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) in
its national travel and tourism satellite accounts: “the economic activity
generated inside the United States by ‘visitors’ of all types—for business
and pleasure, by residents and nonresidents alike—and outside
the United States by U.S. residents” (Okubo and Planting).2 Yet measuring
travel and tourism activity is not easy, particularly at the state
and local levels. Unlike industries such as construction, manufacturing,
or retail trade, most data sources do not list an industry called “travel
and tourism.” At the national level, the BEA is able to use detailed
industry-level data to provide estimates of travel and tourism’s importance.
To do this, it first determines which commodities are typically
purchased by visitors and which industries produce these items. The
BEA then attributes various proportions of output and employment in
an industry to travel and tourism based on the share of its products
that are consumed by visitors as opposed to nonvisitors. These proportions
range from greater than 75 percent for the hotel and air
transportation industries to less than 5 percent for the railroad and
retail trade industries.3
Studies that compare travel and tourism activity across states and
local areas must generally rely on other methods to determine travel and
tourism’s importance. In this article, the basic measure of travel and
tourism used to compare activity across states and localities will be
employment in hotels, air travel, and amusement/recreation.4 Employment
is often the only industry-level measure available for these
geographic areas (although when other types of estimates are available
they will sometimes be used for comparison purposes). The choice of
the three industries was based largely on the proportions of their total
output and employment that the BEA attributes to travel and tourism
at the national level. As mentioned above, this share is very high for
hotels and air travel. The share of national activity in the
amusement/recreation industry attributed to travel and tourism is considerably
smaller (about 25 percent) because local residents are often
responsible for a large portion of this industry’s revenues. Still, if an area
has a high concentration of amusement/recreation employment-
which would include jobs in such establishments as museums, casinos,
ski resorts, and amusement parks—then the area more than likely
attracts a large number of visitors.
Some studies include other industries in their measures of travel and
tourism activity as well, such as restaurants, car rental agencies, and
public transit. The basic measure in this article excludes these industries,
usually either because economic data are missing for most geographic
areas or because only a very small portion of activity in the industry can
be attributed to travel and tourism.5 Given that these other industries are
excluded, however, the basic measure likely understates travel and
tourism’s importance in many areas.6