The national importance of travel and tourism

Travel and tourism is clearly an important industry in the United
States. While estimates of travel expenditures as a share of national output
vary based on the measure used, most studies place the current share
between 4 and 6 percent. This is larger than the contribution to U.S.
GDP of residential fixed investment, motor vehicle output, and national
defense. In its travel and tourism satellite accounts, the BEA found that
total domestic tourism demand in 1997 was approximately $408 billion.7
Of this total, slightly more than 70 percent was for leisure travel. A recent
study by Global Insight found that travel and tourism accounted for 4.0
percent of total output in the nation’s top 100 metropolitan areas in
2000. Perhaps the most widely cited statistics of travel and tourism’s
importance are those of the Travel Industry Association of America (TIA),
whose estimates show that travel expenditures in the United States were
$591 million in 2000 before falling to $555 million in 2001.
Since comparisons across states and localities in this article will
often be based on employment in the basic travel and tourism industries
(hotels, air travel, amusement/recreation), the amount of national
employment in these industries is also relevant. In 2000, the most
recent year for which data are available, the basic travel and tourism
industries accounted for 3.6 percent of total U.S. employment, up from
3.3 percent in 1990. These shares are similar to those found in the
BEA’s satellite accounts for 1997 (3.5 percent of total employment) and
the Global Insight study (4.2 percent).

Unlike in some industries—such as retail trade, which accounts for
14 to 19 percent of employment in all U.S. states—travel and tourism’s
share of employment varies considerably across states. The highest
shares are found in Nevada (27.7 percent) and Hawaii (12.3 percent),
while the lowest shares are in Alabama (1.8 percent) and Arkansas (2.0
percent). The disparities in travel and tourism’s share are even greater
across metropolitan areas. In Atlantic City and Las Vegas, for example,
roughly 30 percent of all jobs are in the basic travel and tourism industries,
and many other jobs undoubtedly rely on visitors to the casinos
and other attractions in those cities. By contrast, four of the nation’s
metro areas have less than 1 percent of their total employment in travel
and tourism.8 Across nonmetro counties, the variation is wider still. A
total of 106 rural counties had more than 1,000 travel and tourism jobs
in 2000, with some counties having as much as 90 percent of their total
employment in the industry. By contrast, 71 rural counties had no
travel and tourism jobs whatsoever in 2000, and 759 others had less
than 1 percent of their employment in the industry.
The differing importance of travel and tourism across the nation is
due to several factors. Travel and tourism employment is concentrated
in some locations because of the presence of natural amenities such as
ocean coasts or mountain ranges and the recreational opportunities they
provide. Many other areas benefit from important transportation infrastructure,
such as interstate highways or airports. And some places, such
as Las Vegas and Orlando, are major tourist areas because of massive
development of tourist attractions