Tsunami causes damage on French Polynesia islands

A TSUNAMI that crossed the Pacific Ocean has reached islands in French Polynesia, with waves of about two metres damaging part of the coast.
Tsunamis struck French Polynesia today but there was no major damage or casualties, as traffic in areas close to the sea was suspended in an alert following the quake in Chile.

Huge waves struck the Gambier archipelago at 6.30am, the high commissioner's office in Papeete said, as the tsunami raced across the Pacific.

The Marquesas islands, northeast of Polynesia, were hit between 7am and 8am by a series of two-metre waves which damaged some boats but no one was hurt, officials said.

A four-metre wave hit Hiva Oa in the Marquesas later on Saturday, officials said.

Schools across the region were closed, the port in Papeete was evacuated and thousands in Tahiti's hillside areas were transported from their homes to safer areas.

However many residents along the coast refused to leave, fearing lootings.

The high commissioner advised people living on low-lying areas to move to regions at least 10 metres above sea level in the Marquesas, the eastern coast of Tahiti and Rurutu.

Between the waves the sea withdrew around 15 metres causing rip currents.

Sirens wailed in French Polynesia and PA systems woke up residents early on Saturday to alert them about the impending waves.

The high commissioner's office in Papeete put the islands on alert at 2am.

A flight run by Air Tahiti Nui, due to arrive in Tahiti on Saturday, was diverted to Hawaii.

In Tahiti all traffic was banned within 500 metres of the coast.

Tsunamis generally come in several waves of which the first may not be the highest.

A huge arc of Pacific nations from New Zealand to Japan went on tsunami alert following the 8.8 magnitude Chilean earthquake, readying emergency plans instituted after the Indian Ocean disaster of 2004.

Emergency officials said a 50cm wave has reached the Chatham Islands east of New Zealand, the third to come ashore in the island group, about 500km east of New Zealand.

"As the scientists have predicted, the waves are increasing in amplitude ... and it's likely they will grow more," Civil Defence national controller Allan Walker said.

National Radio in New Zealand reported four waves of about two metres hit the Marquesas Islands of French Polynesia early on Sunday. The first wave passed Tahiti with no effects.

Asia-Pacific nations were evacuating coastlines ahead of the tsunami generated by a devastating earthquake in Chile early on Saturday.
