The tourism–economy causality in the United States

Because of the potential economic benefits of tourism, such as
increases in foreign exchange earnings, income, employment and
taxes (Archer, 1995; Balaguer & Cantavella-Jorda, 2002; Dritsakis,
2004; Durbarry, 2002), many governments have engaged in
tourism development for the purpose of promoting economic
growth (Mill & Morrison, 2002; Sahli & Nowak, 2007). However,
empirical studies have shown inconsistent or even contradictory
results regarding the tourism-led economic growth hypothesis. For
example, Dritsakis (2004) found a bi-directional causal relationship
in Greece; Kim, Chen and Jang (2006) reported a bi-directional
causality in Taiwan; and Oh (2005) discovered economy-driven
tourism growth in Korea.
Considering that these empirical studies are based upon
different countries, the inconsistent results may be a reflection of
the country effect. Because countries could be different in terms of
the weight of tourism in the overall economy (Oh, 2005), the size
and openness of the economy (Kim et al., 2006), and the production
capacity constraints (Dwyer, Forsyth, Madden, & Spurr, 2000), the
tourism–economy relationship could also differ from one country
to another. Costello (1993) also concluded that a substantial
fraction of changes in annual productivity could be attributed to
nation-specific factors. The diverse relationships between tourism
growth and economic development in different country settings
(Balaguer & Cantavella-Jorda, 2002; Dritsakis, 2004; Kim et al.,
2006; Oh, 2005) found in existing empirical studies further support
the influence of country effect.
The U.S. tourism industries are among the largest employers in
the country and generate the largest tourism receipts in the world
(World Tourism Organization, 2006). Tourism has created more
than 7.5 million jobs and generates $104.9 billion in taxes (American
Hotel & Lodging Association, 2006). Nevertheless, little effort
has been made to investigate the relationship between tourism and
economy in the U.S. Investigating the tourism–economy relationship
in the U.S. would not only improve the understanding of the
interaction between tourism industries and the economy in the U.S.
but would also provide an opportunity for examining the tourism–
economy relationship in the context of a developed economy.
The inconsistent results among extant literature may also come
from treating all tourism related businesses as a homogeneous
industry. Unlike other industries that consist of firms offering
similar goods and services, the tourism industry is more of
a ‘system’ (Mill & Morrison, 2002) that incorporates a variety of
different types of businesses and organizations, such as lodging
establishments, airlines, restaurants, and casinos (American Hotel
& Lodging Association, 2006). These tourism businesses may
influence or respond to the same economic events differently in
terms of timing and magnitude due to the difference in their
offerings, albeit still related to tourism. Schmalensee (1985) also 
indicated that industry effect is the most important factor for
profitability, which further suggests that business performance
could also vary from industry to industry. Consequently, when the
tourism related industries are pooled together, they might interact
with the overall economy as a portfolio, whose overall performance
is subject to the weights and performance of individual industries.
This could cause the relationship between the portfolio of tourism
industries and the overall economy to be unstable across countries
since the weights and performance of individual industries could
be different. Therefore, investigating the tourism–economy relationship
on the sub-industry level could generate more precise
outcomes on the dynamism between economic and tourism
development. Additionally, since extant studies have focused on
the relationship between overall tourism growth and economic
development, this study also fills a research gap in the literature by
investigating both the tourism–economy causality on the subindustry
level.
This study also aims to identify a temporal causal hierarchy
among the performances of tourism industries. Until recently,
industry cycle studies have primarily relied on macroeconomic
variables (Choi, 2003; Guzhva & Pagiavlas, 2004; Wheaton &
Rossoff, 1998). Extracting cues from related industries, the temporal
hierarchy of industry performance could function as an easier and
potentially more reliable alternative for predicting the turning
points of industry performance. Therefore, the dual objectives of
this study are 1) to examine the relationships between tourism
industries’ growth and economic growth, and 2) to explore the
interrelationships among the growth of tourism industries.
