Will Trump’s travel ban affect Cape tourism?

As the weather on Cape Cod slowly turns from winter to spring, owners of seasonal businesses start to turn their eyes toward summer with a keen eye on any signs that might show them how their year will shape up — the economy, early bookings, gas prices.

Now some of them may add the words of President Donald Trump to their economic indicators.

Trump’s fiery rhetoric and the implementation of a travel ban for people from six predominantly Muslim countries has caused fear in tourism circles of a decreased interest in international tourism to the United States. On Cape Cod, where international tourism accounted for $128 million in consumer spending in 2015, the concern has already crept into the conversation.

“Several key members have called me, starting last month, saying, ’Hey, we’ve noticed our international inquiries and bookings are down significantly,” said Wendy Northcross, CEO of the Cape Cod Chamber of Commerce. “The international ripples are real. It remains to be seen if people stay really concerned.”

Earlier this month, the U.S. Travel Association said the Trump administration’s immigration policies are hurting tourism. The nonprofit industry organization said in a statement that there are “mounting signs” of “a broad chilling effect on demand for international travel to the United States.”

Roger Dow, the association’s president, said there’s concern that many international travelers have interpreted Trump’s policies as “wanting to discourage international visitors generally, not just those who pose a security risk.”

Northcross and Jay Ash, the Massachusetts secretary of Housing and Economic Development, each said they’re hearing of canceled international travel statewide.

“We’ve heard from tour operators that portions, if not entire planefuls, of tourists have canceled,” Ash said. “It’s something that concerns us because tourism is so important, and the governor is going to be speaking to Washington officials about that.”

According to Hopper Research, which specializes in studying airfare trends and predictions, flight search demand from international origins to the United States was down nearly across the board from Trump’s inauguration through Feb. 22. The day the first travel ban was announced, searches were down 17 percent compared with former President Barack Obama’s last two weeks in office; 103 of the 122 countries in which Hopper has significant data show a drop averaging about 22 percent.

Searches from Russia, however, were up 66 percent, the research notes.

Hopper also broke its data down by arrival airport; at Boston’s Logan International Airport, searches were down more than 14 percent after the inauguration compared to the two weeks before Trump took office.

Northcross said the majority of the international travelers who come to the Cape do so through either Logan or a New York airport. About 70 percent of the international travelers who come to Boston never leave the city; of those who make their way to the Cape, the bulk are from Ireland and the United Kingdom, followed by Germany, France, Italy and Scandinavian countries.

“Our work is to get them out of Boston and down here,” Northcross said. “We do that because they stay longer and spend more money (than domestic tourists).”

Domestic spending on the Cape, according to Northcross, accounted for $1 billion in 2015.

Nancy Gardella, executive director of the Martha’s Vineyard Chamber of Commerce, said she’s hearing “concerns, but not any hard data” about a decline in overseas travel.

“What I’m hearing is people are worried about what will happen,” she said. “Particularly I think people are very worried for the late summer, autumn and beyond.”

Close to 20 percent of island tourists are from overseas, largely from the same sources as on the Cape. Gardella said the island is seeing growing numbers of independent Chinese travelers and steady growth from India and Australia as well, but competition for visitors is fierce in the region.

“We are one of several destinations for folks,” she said. “They’re likely flying into Boston or New York, spending a little time there and then driving. New England is still a nice little niche for the fly/drive visitor, but I think people are seriously considering what they are going to be able to do.”

But it’s still only March, and the next few months, both politically and economically, will prove illuminative.

Carol Edmondson, chairwoman of the Cape Cod Chamber of Commerce’s B&B committee and consultant at Innkeeping Specalists, said the season is shaping up to be strong for smaller proprietors but it may be too early to tell.

“They’re about six to eight weeks out in booking rooms, so it’s a bit early to get a read on international travel,” she said. “Certainly I think everyone feels most everything is up for grabs.”

Debra Catania, vice president of Catania Hospitality Group, said bookings have been steady compared to previous years at her properties, the largest of which is the Cape Codder Resort & Spa.

“I really don’t think there’s been a problem,” she said. “We get the travelers anyways. They love America, and they’re going to come no matter what. They may get aggravated, but that won’t stop them from coming. If the (Boston Marathon) bombing isn’t going to stop them, nothing is going to stop them.”

Jeff Talmadge, owner of vacation home booking site WeNeedaVacation.com, said international visitors to his website are less than 5 percent of their total traffic. Within that small slice, however, visits from the United Kingdom, Germany and Ireland are seeing double-digit percentage drops compared to this point last year.

Once again, Russia is coming on strong, with traffic up 16 percent so far this year.

Leading up to the inauguration, bookings on the site were up 20 percent compared to last year before dropping. They have since recovered and bookings are up 5.5 percent overall compared to last year for properties on the Cape and Islands, he said, but he’s well aware it could change again before summer hits.

“Uncertainty and chaos always make people hesitate and procrastinate a bit,” he said. “With what’s going on here, people don’t know what to expect. I think there was a burp, but I don’t know how it will affect the summer overall.”