Trump Travel Ban: Experts Predict 'Severe Damage' To U.S. Tourism Industry

As President Donald Trump's executive order limiting overseas travel into the U.S. works its way through the courts, travel industry professionals are already predicting a disastrous impact on travel to the U.S. from overseas.

Adam Sacks, president of the U.S.- and U.K.-based travel industry consultancy Tourism Economics, expects this decision and the policy pronouncements from the Trump administration "to severely damage the US travel sector this year."

Big deal? In a word, yes. "International visitors spent $246 billion in the U.S. in 2016," Sacks says. "This exceeds the value of exports of autos ($152 billion), agriculture ($137 billion), and petroleum products ($97 billion)."

Among the restrictions: citing security concerns, the order bans visitors from 7 majority Muslim countries from entering the U.S. for 90 days, and most refugees for 120 days. It also tightens visa requirements for visitors from many other countries.

Sacks says that the direct impact of the ban from the 7 nations (Iraq, Iran, Libya, Sudan, Somalia, Syria and Yemen) will be limited. Collectively these countries comprise "just 0.1 percent of the historic travel market to the U.S."

It's the wider restrictions - and the messaging surrounding them - that are causing even greater economic concern, including what Sacks calls "uncertainty for those traveling on visas and antipathy toward the U.S. across an even broader group."

"It’s extraordinarily difficult to convey a message of welcome above the volume of 'America first' rhetoric as it reverberates through immigration, trade and visa policies," he says.

This comes at a time when the U.S. dollar is strengthening against many other currencies, already making travel to the U.S. less affordable.

Sacks cites booking and survey data "indicating that travelers are adjusting their travel plans," with the greatest losses projected from Europe, Mexico and the Middle East.

The last time there was a sustained drop in travel to the U.S., Sacks says, was 2000-2006, in the aftermath of 9-11 and the Iraq War. "Visa policy was particularly restrictive, and antipathy toward U.S. foreign policy was relatively prevalent."

During that time, he says, "Overseas travel to the U.S. contracted 3 percent." Even figuring in travel from neighboring Canada and Mexico, overall travel from outside the U.S. "failed to grow at all," despite generally strong global economic growth.

Jonathan Grella, executive vice president for public affairs at the U.S. Travel Association, the industry trade group, says that "In the years following 9-11, it took a long time for America to regain the perception that we were open for business."

Between 2008 and 2016, by contrast, Sacks says that international travel to the U.S. grew by about 4 percent per year, 35 percent overall.

In addition to the Trump administration's policies themselves, Grella faults the way they were announced. "Americans, including ourselves, will give the President, particularly a new one, quite a bit of latitude and deference when it comes to security," Grella says. "But in this particular instance, the chaos and confusion were avoidable and unnecessary."

Grella says that as "our first CEO President," Trump "understands marketing and branding better than any other President before." Destinations "can either provide incentives and roll out the red carpet for businesses to relocate and visitors to come, or they can tell them they're not welcome any longer."

"Hopefully, America will remain hospitable to legitimate travelers, while always putting security first," he says, "and will be careful with our words and deeds so that we don't alienate people needlessly."

"People have a choice when it comes to business and leisure travel," Grella says. "We can either put our best foot forward and welcome them to the States, or be more hostile and beg them to go elsewhere."