Travel ban proposals making California tourism industry nervous

Hoteliers to tour guides are nervous that a revised travel order and international tensions between the Trump administration and major trading partners could be bad news for the state’s tourism trade, a key part of the economy.

“The administration’s restriction of travel to the United States for nationals of six countries and a perceived ‘anti-welcome’ sentiment, have caused deep concerns across the international travel and tourism community,” said Ernest Wooden Jr., head of the Los Angeles Tourism and Convention Board.

President Trump signed a scaled-back version of a travel ban that prohibits new visas for people from six Muslim-majority countries, instead of the earlier seven countries. It also temporarily shut down America’s refugee program. Like his first such order, it has been blocked by the courts and the appeals process is underway.

A forecast for the L.A. County area by Tourism Economics identified a potential three-year loss of 800,000 international visitors and potentially $736?million in tourism spending.

“This loss would be significant for our local businesses and families employed by the hospitality industry, which is one of the largest and healthiest job sectors in L.A. County,” he said.

To counter the dampening mood, the board is launching a blitz campaign in key markets, including parts of the Middle East, Mexico, China and Canada to highlight the area’s diversity and underscore that the region has open arms for visitors.

Southern California isn’t the only area nervous about the potential impacts. Across the country, industry leaders are wondering aloud what Trump’s policies will do to tourists’ appetite to visit the United States.

“Unfortunately, it doesn’t appear that the administration fully seized the opportunity to differentiate between the potential security risks targeted by the order and the legitimate business and leisure visitors from abroad who support 15.1 million American jobs,” U.S. Travel Association President and CEO Roger Dow said in a statement released earlier this month. “The question remains whether the revised order did enough to mollify the prospective traveler from Canada, Europe, or elsewhere around the world who may have been put off by the initial travel ban.”

GOLDEN STATE BLUES

California’s hospitality industry hosted 17 million foreign visitors in 2015. Many flocked to such landmarks as the Sunset Strip, Disneyland or the Golden Gate bridge, basking in the Golden State’s most iconic locales.

That same year, the travel industry employed 1 million people statewide and represented $1 of every $40 created by the California economy, according to the latest stats available from the VisitCalifornia tourist bureau.

“All of a sudden there is uncertainty out there,” said Lynn Mohrfeld, head of the California Hotel and Lodging Association, which represents about two-thirds of the state’s hotels. “If the perception that the U.S. is an unwelcoming destination becomes reality, then it is going to spell a lot of trouble for the travel industry.”

What’s concerned him is whether potential tourists are looking at plans elsewhere for the peak seasons in the summer and fall.

Flight app Hopper found international searches for travel to the United States below seasonal averages.

International visitors are also a growing business. The foreign slice of the state’s tourism dollars is up from 18 percent midrecession in 2009 and 15 percent in 2003, shortly after the 2001 terror attacks and the ensuing war in Afghanistan and Iraq.

Adding to problematic trade tensions is that some of California’s most lucrative tourists come from nations where the new administration and foreign leadership haven’t exactly seen eye to eye.

TOURIST DOLLARS

If a tourist here is foreign, they’re likely a Mexican. The proposed border wall has irked Mexico, home to 7.8 million visitors to California in 2015, or roughly 4 in 9 of the state’s foreign visitors.

But these guests don’t spend much — just $397 per visit. That adds up to $3.1 billion of Mexican cash coming here, or 13 percent of California’s foreign tourism spending.

Political squabbles with China over military and trade issues are no help. China’s 1.16 million visitors to California are heavy spenders: $2,191 per trip — adding up to $2.5 billion or 10 percent of foreign tourist spending.

And then there are the Middle Eastern nations targeted by proposed travel limits, as well as neighboring lands, where U.S. anxieties about Muslims also could alter travel plans. Combined, all Middle Eastern nations contributed just 286,000 visitors to the state in 2015, but these tourists are the biggest spenders: $2,379 per visit. It was business worth $681 million, or 3 percent of the total pie.

WHERE TOURISTS GO

But other parts of the county that haven’t yet captured the world’s imagination could escape potential harm.

“The beauty of Long Beach is that we are convention-driven,” said Steve Goodling, head of the Convention & Visitors Bureau in Long Beach, where some hotels recorded a banner January. “Our conventioners are, generally speaking, domestic and tourist pleasure travelers from the Los Angeles area first, the San Francisco area second, and the desert areas third. So this doesn’t impact Long Beach like it does Los Angeles.”

It’s purely speculative to say whether heated geopolitical rhetoric or travel limitations will scare away any meaningful portion of the millions that visited California from foreign lands in 2015. But there’s $24 billion in yearly international tourist spending at risk.

Foreign visitors account for just 6 percent of all California tourists, but their business impact is amplified by their heavy spending — $1,400 per visit vs. $400 each for domestic visitors. Those hefty foreign budgets add up to 22 percent of all tourism spending in the state, according to VisitCalifornia.

And that has many industry leaders paying attention.

“It remains to be seen if it is going to have an impact,” said Charles Harris, head of marketing for Visit Anaheim, a tourism board based in the home of Disneyland. “You can’t determine a trend in one month.”

But he added, “We are always monitoring the travel habits and interest of our international visitors.”