Data suggests a 'Trump slump' in travel to U.S.

International flight-booking data released this week confirmed concerns across the travel industry that president Trump's 90-day travel ban on nationals from seven Muslim-majority countries is dealing a significant blow to inbound travel to the U.S.

Following the Jan. 27 ban on travel to the U.S. by nationals from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Yemen, Somalia, Sudan and Syria, net bookings from those seven countries were down 80% between Jan. 28 and Feb. 4, compared with the same period last year, according to flight reservation transactions analyzed by the travel data company ForwardKeys.

ForwardKeys also reported a 6.5% drop in overall international travel to the U.S. for the same period when compared with the equivalent eight-day period the year before. 

Meanwhile, Hopper, a flight app that tracks GDS searches in order to analyze fare prices and demand, also found that the number of flight searches for travel from international points of origin to the U.S. -- a key indicator of future travel intent -- was down 17% the week of Jan. 27. Last year, there was only a 1.8% decline during the same time period.

"The data forces a compelling conclusion that Donald Trump's travel ban immediately caused a significant drop in bookings to the USA and an immediate impact on future travel," said Olivier Jager, CEO of ForwardKeys. "This is not good news for the U.S. economy."

Indeed, the Global Business Travel Association estimated that $185 million in business-travel bookings were lost in the week following the institution of the ban.

A federal appeals court upheld a block on the travel ban this week -- it had been halted by a federal judge on Feb. 4, and the Trump administration was appealing the judge's ruling. Nevertheless, destination marketing organizations and travel associations representing members with significant travel dollars on the line have come out in aggressive opposition to the ban, unveiling campaigns aimed at countering the image of America as unwelcoming.

NYC & Company, New York's marketing agency, issued a statement this week that it opposes the travel ban and changed its campaign plans for 2017 in order to clearly communicate a message that "all are welcome," which is the organization's new campaign slogan. In so doing, NYC & Company made it clear that it is opposed to Trump's executive order on this issue.

"This is big business and jobs for a lot of people," said Fred Dixon, NYC & Company's president and CEO, adding that New York's $60 billion tourism industry is the city's fifth largest economic driver. "We've worked so hard over the last however many years to make sure that the United States is seen as welcoming. ... Great progress had been made, and now we are very concerned that all of that is in jeopardy."

Dixon said that while NYC & Company does not yet have any numbers that show a slump in inbound tourism in response to Trump's ban, there are some early indicators that the policy could have some serious negative consequences for New York's tourism industry. 

For one, he pointed to a New York Times article that indicated New York had lost a bid to host the World Federation of Tourist Guide Associations in 2019 as a result of the ban. 

"People are choosing not to bring their business here," Dixon said. "This is a critical time, and the world is a big place and a lot of people want that business."

He also said that a popular German lifestyle magazine, which he did not name, had in defiance of the ban decided not to run features about the U.S. He also referred to a recent opinion piece in the Toronto Star encouraging Canadians to boycott travel to the U.S.

Such indications came on top of the challenges of dealing with a strong U.S. dollar, raising concern that the ban could have some real and lasting impact on the tourism economy.