'Trump Slump' hits tourism in the U.S. — and the Berkshires

WILLIAMSTOWN — It seems that Donald Trump's foreign policy may indeed keep foreigners from coming to the United States, but not only the ones he's targeted.

The business news website Bloomberg is reporting that nearly half of the Germans interested in travel to the United States will resist that notion because they either feel unwelcome or don't want to appear as if they endorse Trump's policies on immigration.

That could have a significant impact on the U.S. tourism industry, including that of the Berkshires.

"Germany is a big market for Massachusetts," said Lauri Klefos, executive vice president of 1Berkshire. "Berkshire County sees about $10 million in spending by international visitors."

She noted that Berkshire County is marketed in Germany, along with other European markets, through a cooperative effort with the Massachusetts Office of Travel & Tourism.

"Massachusetts has been focused on them (Germans) for quite a while now," Klefos said. "Fall Foliage, they call it Indian Summer, is a big attraction for them. If they stopped coming, we would feel it."

And Germans aren't the only international travelers going elsewhere because of Trump. Travel industry insiders have started referring to it as the "Trump Slump."

The Bloomberg report points to a survey by GfK SE that showed that roughly 46 percent of Germans who would like to visit the United States. have changed their minds since Trump's inauguration.

The results of the poll also shows that 36 percent would continue to travel to the states. About 17 percent noted that national politics does not affect their travel plans. The pollsters reached 1,004 people in Germany between Feb. 3 and Feb 10. 

Figures provided by the U.S. Department of Commerce Office of Travel & Tourism Industries and the Massachusetts Office of Travel & Tourism show that in 2015, 129,000 German nationals visited Massachusetts, where they spent roughly $200 million, including about $12 million in state and local taxes.

But the Trump Slump is bigger than that.

Kjell Truedsson, owner/operator of the Maple Terrace Motel in Williamstown, says he has German guests on a fairly regular basis, as well as visitors from other European nations. 

"It's more than Germany," said Truedsson, a native of Sweden. "I think it's 46 percent of Europe. There will just be fewer people buying tickets to the U.S. because of all the turmoil. There is a tremendous amount of concern and worry in Europe. Tourism has gone down already."

"Travel Weekly" magazine is reporting that after the Trump administration's Jan. 27 ban on travel to the U.S. from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Yemen, Somalia, Sudan and Syria, bookings from those seven countries were down 80 percent between Jan. 28 and Feb. 4, according to travel data company ForwardKeys. That ban was blocked by the courts about a week later, but Trump has vowed to redraft the order.

International travel to the U.S. overall was down by 6.5 percent for the same period, ForwardKeys data showed. Meanwhile, the Global Business Travel Association reported that in the week following announcement of the travel ban, business travel declined by nearly $185 million. 

If the Trump Slump continues to hamper foreign tourism at the same magnitude, the loss of foreign travel dollars in the United States could come to billions of dollars, putting hundreds of thousands of jobs in the domestic tourism industry at risk.

New York City's tourist industry alone is worth $60 billion annually.

In Northern Berkshire, the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art sees a good number of German visitors.

"A significant portion of Mass MoCA's European visitors hail from Germany," said Jodi Joseph, director of communications at Mass MoCA. "It will be unfortunate if those travelers are sitting out U.S. destinations for a spell, but we'll be here to welcome them as soon as they decide to return."
